REAL BUTLER DATABASE BACKUP AND RESTORE-TEST HANDOFF

Status updated: 2026-10-02
Destination host: the Linux host currently running Chessism and Real Butler
Stable application ID: real-butler


1. PURPOSE

Implement a manual, engine-native, verifiable backup system for Real Butler on
the recovery disk already used by Chessism. A backup is not considered proven
only because the backup command and repository verification succeeded. The
superuser must also be able to click a separate "Test backup" button that
restores the latest verified recovery point into disposable local storage,
starts the restored services in isolation, validates them, and deletes the
temporary copy.

Both operations are manual-only:

  - "Backup Real Butler" creates or updates the protected recovery set.
  - "Test backup" performs a restore rehearsal of the latest verified set.

Neither action runs on a timer, at application startup, after a certain number
of days, or automatically after another backup. A worker timeout is only the
maximum permitted runtime after the user clicks a button; it is not a schedule.

The implementation must never copy a live database directory directly, write a
fallback backup onto the system disk when the recovery disk is absent, touch
Timeshift, or delete the previous recoverable chain before its replacement is
verified.


2. VERIFIED HOST STORAGE BOUNDARY

Physical recovery disk:

  Model:              ST1000DM010-2EP102
  Device observed:    /dev/sda (do not use this unstable name in configuration)
  Advertised size:    approximately 931.5 GiB

Partitions observed on the disk:

  /dev/sda1   1 GiB      vfat    label MAINMON_EFI
  /dev/sda2   128 GiB    btrfs   label main-monitor-rescue
  /dev/sda3   802.5 GiB  ext4    label timeshift

The shared ext4 filesystem is mounted persistently by immutable UUID:

  UUID:        1ebffac6-4b7a-4906-9e07-9586060d3825
  Mount point: /main-monitor-db-backups

Installed /etc/fstab entry:

  UUID=1ebffac6-4b7a-4906-9e07-9586060d3825 /main-monitor-db-backups ext4 defaults,nofail,x-systemd.automount,x-systemd.device-timeout=10s 0 2

The pre-change fstab was preserved at:

  /etc/fstab.before-chessism-20261002T170509Z

No repartitioning was performed. Real Butler and Chessism share the ext4
filesystem through isolated top-level directories and application-enforced
budgets. Do not resize /dev/sda3 or create another partition for this feature.

Top-level ownership boundaries:

  /main-monitor-db-backups/timeshift
      Existing Timeshift state. Never write, rename, prune, chmod, chown, hash,
      or recursively scan this directory from either application.

  /main-monitor-db-backups/chessism
      Chessism-only backup data. Real Butler must not reuse or modify it.

  /main-monitor-db-backups/real-butler
      The only permitted Real Butler backup subtree.

Chessism uses its own marker:

  /main-monitor-db-backups/.chessism-backup-volume

Real Butler must use a distinct read-only marker:

  /main-monitor-db-backups/.real-butler-backup-volume

The Real Butler marker must contain only the expected filesystem UUID. An
absent or mismatched marker means "backup destination unavailable." Do not
create the repository under an unmounted host directory with the same path.

The Real Butler directory began as an empty placeholder owned by UID:GID
1000:1000 with mode 0750. Inspect the Real Butler service users before changing
ownership. Change only the application subtree and use the actual backup-tool
UID/GID; never recursively chown the mount root.


3. STORAGE POLICY

Application policies, not physical partitions:

  Chessism allocation:       200,000,000,000 bytes
  Real Butler allocation:    350,000,000,000 bytes
  Protected global free:     150,000,000,000 bytes

The Real Butler worker must refuse to start if its projected write would exceed
350 GB or cross the filesystem-wide 150 GB free-space floor. It must recheck
free space while writing and retain an emergency stop margin; Chessism uses
2 GB. A capacity failure must preserve every previously verified recovery set.

Historical planning measurements placed all Real Butler Docker persistence at
approximately 105.9 GB, including about 70.46 GB of PostgreSQL. These figures
are not current guarantees. Remeasure every authoritative volume before tool,
retention, and temporary-space decisions.

Chessism's final reference snapshot on 2026-10-02 was:

  Protected PostgreSQL size:       53,190,858,747 bytes
  Chessism backup subtree usage:   18,853,966,321 bytes
  Filesystem free bytes:          798,501,269,504 bytes

Those numbers demonstrate compression and deduplication; they are not a Real
Butler capacity estimate. Always distinguish:

  - uncompressed protected database size;
  - compressed repository size;
  - bytes newly written by the latest backup;
  - total application-subtree usage; and
  - free local space required for a restore rehearsal.

Persist a controlled exact usage measurement after write operations. Do not
recursively measure a large repository or Timeshift on every UI poll.


4. INVENTORY REAL BUTLER BEFORE IMPLEMENTATION

Do not assume PostgreSQL is Real Butler's only authoritative store. Inspect its
Compose files, environment, models, workers, migrations, and named volumes and
write an explicit recovery-boundary inventory containing:

  - every database engine and exact version;
  - database names, roles, schemas, extensions, and migration version;
  - PostgreSQL large objects, if any;
  - object/blob storage such as MinIO or filesystem uploads;
  - vector/search stores and whether they are authoritative or rebuildable;
  - queues/caches that can be discarded and rebuilt;
  - encryption keys and configuration required to interpret restored data;
  - every named volume and bind mount with exact current byte counts;
  - relationships between relational rows and external documents/blobs; and
  - the startup order required to validate an isolated restore.

If rows refer to documents held only in object storage, a PostgreSQL recovery
point alone is not a Real Butler backup. Define one backup set whose manifest
identifies every authoritative component and the consistency boundary between
them. Secrets must remain outside Git, logs, status JSON, and manifests.


5. FINAL CHESSISM REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE

Chessism now provides a working reference with these properties:

  - manual-only database backups from a superuser page;
  - PostgreSQL 15 and pgBackRest 2.59.2;
  - an isolated application directory and stanza;
  - bundled block-incremental storage with zstd level 3 compression;
  - one backup process at a time;
  - a new full chain after 30 incrementals, 30 days, an interrupted WAL chain,
    or a storage-format migration;
  - two retained complete full chains;
  - a 200 GB application budget and 150 GB global free-space floor;
  - a 2 GB emergency stop margin;
  - an owner-token Redis lock shared by Chessism backup writers;
  - atomic status, usage, catalog, and per-backup manifest files;
  - exact recovery-point verification before success is published;
  - a separate portable FEN-analysis export on the same UUID; and
  - a manual, isolated, disposable restore rehearsal.

Chessism's current pgBackRest settings include:

  repo1-retention-full=2
  repo1-retention-full-type=count
  repo1-bundle=y
  repo1-block=y
  compress-type=zst
  compress-level=3
  process-max=1
  start-fast=y
  archive-async=y
  archive-push-queue-max=5GiB
  archive-timeout=2m

Real Butler must have its own stanza, repository, spool, lock directory, WAL-gap
marker, queue, Redis key, status files, manifest directory, Docker volume, and
container image. Never share Chessism's namespace.

Chessism also demonstrates why recovery scopes must be named clearly:

  - "Backup database" protects the complete PostgreSQL database, including all
    FEN rows and Stockfish results together with games, moves, players,
    associations, summaries, and every other database table.
  - "Update FEN analysis" updates a separate portable analysis-only JSONL gzip
    export and its metadata. It is not another complete database backup.

The expensive FEN analysis is therefore present in both recovery formats, but
only the FEN button updates the independent portable dataset. Real Butler should
make equivalent distinctions if it offers component exports in addition to a
complete application recovery set.


6. PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED AND THE SOLUTIONS

6.1 Compressed size looked "too small"

The source Chessism database was roughly 57 GB while its first pgBackRest
repository occupied roughly 14.9 GB. This was not missing data: zstd compression,
repository bundling, and repeated database-page content made the physical
repository much smaller than PostgreSQL's uncompressed size.

Solution:

  - Show "database protected" separately from "backup storage used."
  - Record and explain both values in manifests and the UI.
  - Do not use repository bytes as the expected restored database size.

6.2 Small logical updates produced very large legacy incrementals

A few player updates grew PostgreSQL by hundreds of MB, but a normal file-level
incremental made the repository jump by many GB. A small change to a very large
relation or index causes a file-level incremental to copy the entire changed
file. This made a tiny logical update appear to cost almost another full backup.

Solution:

  - Enable pgBackRest repository bundling and block incrementals.
  - Treat the change as a repository format migration requiring a new full with
    block maps.
  - Preserve the legacy chain until the new block-enabled full verifies.
  - Expire superseded chains with pgBackRest commands only after verification;
    never delete repository files manually.
  - Continue subsequent backups as block incrementals. One verified Chessism
    incremental later added approximately 235.6 MB to the repository rather
    than recopying every changed multi-GB relation file.

Real Butler should enable block incrementals before its first full if its
installed pgBackRest version supports the feature and restore testing confirms
it. Avoid an avoidable legacy-to-block migration.

6.3 A redundant database index inflated both source and backup storage

Chessism had both the FEN primary key and an equivalent ix_fen_fen index. The
duplicate index consumed several GB and was repeatedly copied by file-level
incrementals.

Solution:

  - Remove the redundant index from the model/schema and live database.
  - Ensure startup schema code does not recreate it.
  - Make restore validation explicitly require the primary key to be valid and
    the redundant index to be absent.

Before Real Butler's first backup, audit very large indexes for exact duplicates.
Do not drop merely similar indexes without query-plan and constraint analysis.

6.4 WAL archiving was interrupted

An external backup disk or uninitialized stanza can make archive-push fail. An
early Chessism configuration let pgBackRest archive activity begin before the
stanza was ready, which caused failures and database restarts. Once WAL
continuity is uncertain, an incremental chain cannot be trusted blindly.

Solution:

  - Use a guarded archive wrapper that validates the UUID marker and initialized
    stanza before invoking pgBackRest.
  - If archiving cannot safely continue, preserve database availability and
    write a durable WAL-gap marker.
  - The next manual backup must detect the gap and require a new full chain.
  - Initialize the stanza while the guard is active, then run pgBackRest check.
  - Name the wrapper so its command contains "pgbackrest" because pgBackRest
    validates archive_command text.
  - Use application-prefixed variables such as REAL_BUTLER_ARCHIVE_GAP_PATH;
    pgBackRest treats PGBACKREST_* names as native configuration options.

6.5 Failed or superseded writes occupied storage

Interrupted attempts and the legacy repository can leave data that should not
be counted as a valid recovery point.

Solution:

  - Publish a catalog row only after native verification succeeds.
  - Keep the previous verified chain until replacement success.
  - Clean failed attempt artifacts with the native repository tool when
    possible.
  - Never use a broad recursive deletion against the mount or repository root.
  - Verify the exact labels selected for expiration and confirm the protected
    replacement still exists afterward.

6.6 The first restore-test click falsely appeared to complete immediately

The installed ARQ version did not support _job_timeout as an enqueue_job option.
It forwarded that name to the task as an ordinary keyword, so the worker raised
TypeError before entering the restore function. ARQ itself reached a terminal
"complete" state even though its result contained success=false, and the UI
incorrectly displayed success and played the completion sound. The worker never
entered its cleanup/finally block, so its owner lock also needed reconciliation.

Solution:

  - Do not pass _job_timeout to enqueue_job on this ARQ version.
  - Register long jobs with arq.worker.func(coroutine, timeout=604800).
  - Keep **_kwargs on the task as defensive compatibility, but do not rely on
    it to implement the timeout.
  - In the UI, result.success=false must override a queue-level terminal status
    and must be rendered as FAILED.
  - Play the sound only after application-level success.
  - Reserve the lock before enqueue, release it if enqueue fails, and always
    release it in the worker's finally block.
  - Add startup/stale-owner reconciliation so a crash before task entry cannot
    permanently block future manual operations.

6.7 The first real restore failed to start PostgreSQL

The 53 GB backup restored successfully, but the disposable server was forced to
max_connections=10. WAL had been generated by the production server with
max_connections=100, so PostgreSQL correctly refused recovery:

  recovery aborted because of insufficient parameter settings
  max_connections = 10 is lower than on the primary server, where it was 100

PostgreSQL recovery is also sensitive to max_worker_processes,
max_wal_senders, max_prepared_transactions, and max_locks_per_transaction.

Solution:

  - Do not lower recovery-sensitive PostgreSQL parameters on the command line.
  - Inherit them from the restored postgresql.conf/WAL-compatible backup.
  - Limit resource impact through container CPU limits, serialized workers,
    private networking/sockets, and no application consumers instead.
  - Preserve capacity fields in a failure report so the UI remains diagnostic.

The production Chessism values at the time were 100 connections, 8 worker
processes, 10 WAL senders, 0 prepared transactions, and 64 locks per transaction.
These are observations, not values to hard-code for Real Butler.

6.8 pgBackRest reported an ownership warning

During restore pgBackRest warned that manifest group root was mapped to the
current group. The restore worker runs as the restricted postgres user, which
cannot preserve root-group ownership for such entries.

Solution:

  - Run the restore as the database OS user.
  - Allow pgBackRest to map inaccessible manifest ownership to that user/group.
  - Verify that restored database files have the expected database ownership.
  - Treat the warning as acceptable only if PostgreSQL starts and validation
    succeeds; do not suppress ownership failures blindly.

6.9 Temporary restore data must not survive completion or a crash

A complete Chessism restore needs approximately 53 GB of local temporary space.
Leaving it behind would silently consume the system disk.

Solution:

  - Use a dedicated Docker restore-test volume, not the live database volume.
  - Name every workspace rehearsal-<job-id> under a fixed restore root.
  - Stop disposable PostgreSQL and delete that exact workspace in finally on
    both success and failure.
  - On backup-worker startup, remove only stale rehearsal-* workspaces to cover
    Docker/host termination before finally runs.
  - Never select unrelated files for startup cleanup.
  - Require uncompressed database bytes plus explicit headroom before starting;
    Chessism uses 15 GB of headroom.

6.10 Active UI state should not remain permanently SUCCESS or FAILED

Persistent catalog history is useful, but an active-status card showing an old
outcome makes the page look busy or broken indefinitely.

Solution:

  - Blink the green activity light only while queued/running.
  - Show terminal SUCCESS or FAILED for two minutes.
  - Return the active card to READY / waiting afterward.
  - Keep the permanent result, error, timestamp, duration, and restore-tested
    flag in the recovery-chain catalog and manifest.


7. VERIFIED CHESSISM RESTORE REHEARSAL

The corrected manual rehearsal successfully restored and validated:

  Backup ID:          20261002-210620F_20261002-215105I
  Started:            2026-10-02T22:45:57.150441Z
  Completed:          2026-10-02T22:48:59.510654Z
  Worker duration:    182.36 seconds
  Protected bytes:    53,190,858,747
  Restored DB bytes:  53,167,783,271
  PostgreSQL:         15.18

Validation proved:

  - the restored database name was chessism_db;
  - every required relation existed;
  - the FEN primary key was present, unique, and valid;
  - the redundant ix_fen_fen index was absent;
  - durable database, ingestion-pipeline, and scored-position summaries existed
    and satisfied their invariants;
  - 799,003 games and 51,364,738 position appearances were represented;
  - the catalog and exact manifest were marked restore_tested=true;
  - the temporary restore volume returned to 0 bytes; and
  - the owner lock was released.

This is the standard Real Butler must reach for its own authoritative recovery
set. Repository verification alone is not equivalent to this evidence.


8. REAL BUTLER IMPLEMENTATION PLAN

Phase A: measure and select native tools

  1. Complete the authoritative-state inventory in section 4.
  2. Measure current source bytes, expected daily change, first-full size,
     retained-chain cost, and local restore-test requirement.
  3. Confirm the 350 GB allocation and 150 GB protected free floor remain safe.
  4. Select each engine's supported online backup mechanism. Use pgBackRest for
     a large PostgreSQL store when appropriate; use native snapshot/export tools
     for other authoritative stores.
  5. Decide repository encryption before the first full. The shared ext4 disk
     and Chessism repository are not themselves encrypted. Store any encryption
     key outside this disk and outside source control.
  6. Define the consistency procedure for multi-store backup sets.

Phase B: create the isolated namespace

Recommended layout, adjusted after inventory:

  /main-monitor-db-backups/real-butler/
      database/
          pgbackrest/             if PostgreSQL uses pgBackRest
          manifests/
      object-storage/             only for authoritative blobs
      vector-or-search/           only if not safely rebuildable
      backup-sets/                cross-store manifests
      backup-status.json
      backup-usage.json
      restore-test-status.json

Mount the recovery root into the relevant containers read-only except for the
smallest Real Butler paths each writer needs. Validate the external UUID/marker
from both API preflight and the actual worker service context.

Phase C: manual backup job

  1. Add a dedicated single-concurrency backup queue and worker.
  2. Add a Real Butler-specific owner-token lock.
  3. Expose only a superuser POST endpoint and explicit UI button.
  4. Preflight marker, writability, allocation, global floor, source health,
     repository health, and projected space.
  5. Atomically persist RUNNING before expensive work.
  6. Create a transactionally consistent recovery set using native tools.
  7. Verify the exact recovery point and every cross-store manifest component.
  8. Publish catalog/manifest/status/usage atomically only after verification.
  9. On failure, retain the last verified chain and sanitized diagnostics.
 10. Use native expiration and retain two complete verified full chains.
 11. Closing the browser must not stop the worker.

Phase D: manual "Test backup" job (required)

  1. Add a second superuser button named "Test backup."
  2. Never schedule it and never run it automatically after a backup.
  3. Serialize it through the same backup lock/queue so repository writes and
     restore reads do not overlap.
  4. Select the exact latest verified complete recovery set and record its ID.
  5. Preflight local free space using uncompressed restore size plus headroom.
  6. Restore into dedicated disposable Docker volumes/directories, never the
     live Real Butler volumes.
  7. Start restored services only on private sockets/networks with no production
     consumers and no externally exposed ports.
  8. Preserve recovery-sensitive engine settings. Restrict CPU/concurrency at
     the container/worker level rather than making the restore invalid.
  9. Validate engine versions, schemas/migrations, required extensions, row
     counts/invariants, object counts/hashes, relational-to-blob references,
     authentication prerequisites, and representative application reads.
 10. Mark only the tested backup-set ID restore_tested=true.
 11. Stop disposable services and delete all temporary restored data in finally.
 12. Add narrowly scoped startup cleanup for interrupted rehearsal workspaces.
 13. Release the owner lock on success, failure, cancellation, enqueue failure,
     and worker restart reconciliation.

Do not expose a button that replaces the live production database. The test
button restores only into disposable storage. A real disaster recovery remains
a documented, deliberate maintenance operation.

Phase E: superuser UI

Show:

  - destination availability and UUID match;
  - uncompressed protected size and compressed backup-subtree usage separately;
  - Real Butler usage versus 350 GB;
  - filesystem free bytes versus the 150 GB floor;
  - latest verified backup ID/type/time/bytes added/storage mode;
  - durable per-recovery-point restore-tested status;
  - current backup or restore-test phase and sanitized detail;
  - "Backup Real Butler" and "Test backup" buttons.

UI lifecycle:

  - disable both buttons while either operation owns the shared lock;
  - show a blinking green light only while queued/running;
  - poll lightweight Redis/status endpoints rather than scanning storage;
  - regard application result.success=false as failure even when the queue job
    itself has reached a terminal state;
  - play the completion sound only on verified application-level success;
  - show SUCCESS/FAILED briefly, then return the card to READY;
  - retain permanent outcome details in the recovery history.


9. POSTGRESQL/PGBACKREST DETAILS IF APPLICABLE

Suggested distinct namespace:

  stanza:       real-butler
  repository:   /backup-volume/real-butler/database/pgbackrest
  manifests:    /backup-volume/real-butler/database/manifests

Suggested initial policy after checking the installed version:

  first backup:              full with block maps enabled
  normal backup:             block incremental
  new full chain:            30 incrementals, 30 days, or WAL gap
  retention:                 2 complete full chains
  compression:               zstd level 3
  repository bundles:        enabled
  process-max:               1 initially

Use the valid global options compress-type=zst and compress-level=3. Do not
invent repo1-compress-* settings. Do not invent application environment names
beginning PGBACKREST_.

The database and backup worker must agree on:

  - pgBackRest version and config;
  - stanza and pg1-path;
  - PostgreSQL Unix socket access;
  - repository and spool paths;
  - guarded archive-push wrapper;
  - the WAL-gap marker; and
  - database OS ownership.

Verify the exact created set, not merely the repository generally. A backup
process exit of zero is necessary but not sufficient. A successful disposable
restore remains separately required.


10. STATUS AND MANIFEST DATA

Write status/usage/catalog files through a temporary sibling, flush, and atomic
rename. Recommended status fields:

  schema_version
  app_id                         always "real-butler"
  database_engine
  status                         ready|queued|running|success|failed|unavailable
  trigger                        manual
  operation                      backup|restore_test
  job_id
  backup_id
  backup_type
  storage_mode
  started_at
  completed_at
  last_verified_at
  restore_tested
  restore_tested_at
  restore_test_elapsed_seconds
  database_bytes                 uncompressed protected size
  repository_bytes
  repository_delta_bytes
  application_bytes
  required_local_bytes           restore rehearsal
  local_free_bytes
  destination_uuid
  relative_path
  manifest_sha256
  validation                     safe summary only
  error_code
  error_message                  sanitized
  detail

Do not store passwords, tokens, full connection strings, encryption keys, or
sensitive document data. Main Monitor must be able to read health without any
database credentials.


11. CROSS-APPLICATION CONCURRENCY

Chessism's Redis lock coordinates only Chessism writers. Real Butler requires
its own lock immediately. Until both applications implement a shared host-level
advisory lock, do not intentionally run large Chessism and Real Butler backups
or restore rehearsals at the same time. Shared disk I/O can make free-space
projections stale and significantly slow both operations.

A future shared lock could live at:

  /main-monitor-db-backups/.backup-write.lock

Both applications must honor it with flock for the entire write/read-intensive
operation. Implementing it in only one project does not provide coordination.


12. ACCEPTANCE CHECKLIST

  [ ] The authoritative-state inventory is complete and reviewed.
  [ ] Current byte usage is measured rather than copied from this handoff.
  [ ] The mounted UUID and Real Butler marker match the expected UUID.
  [ ] Missing/read-only/wrong storage reports unavailable without downtime or
      a fallback write to the operating-system disk.
  [ ] Timeshift and Chessism contents remain byte-for-byte outside scope.
  [ ] Backup and restore-test operations are both manual-only.
  [ ] Only one Real Butler backup-related operation can run at once.
  [ ] Both jobs survive browser closure.
  [ ] The 350 GB allocation, 150 GB free floor, and stop margin are enforced.
  [ ] Failure cannot replace or expire the last verified recovery set.
  [ ] Status, usage, catalogs, and manifests are atomic and contain no secrets.
  [ ] Block-incremental behavior is verified if enabled.
  [ ] WAL-gap detection forces a full chain.
  [ ] Retention preserves two complete verified chains.
  [ ] The UI never confuses a queue terminal state with application success.
  [ ] Completion sound occurs only after verified success.
  [ ] "Test backup" restores every authoritative component in isolation.
  [ ] Recovery starts with WAL-compatible engine settings.
  [ ] Critical schema/data/blob/application validations pass.
  [ ] The exact recovery set is marked restore-tested with timestamp/duration.
  [ ] Temporary restored data is 0 bytes after success and failure.
  [ ] Startup removes only abandoned, narrowly named rehearsal workspaces.
  [ ] All owner locks are released after every terminal path.
  [ ] Main Monitor reads health without database credentials.
  [ ] A separate disaster-recovery runbook documents replacing production.


13. SAFE OPERATING RULES FOR THE IMPLEMENTING AGENT

  - Inspect queues, locks, mounts, UUIDs, free space, and service state first.
  - Never use recursive deletion/chown against the mount root, Timeshift,
    Chessism, a device root, or an unresolved path.
  - Never copy a live engine data directory as the backup mechanism.
  - Never delete a verified recovery point to make room for an unverified one.
  - Prefer targeted image builds and service recreation; avoid broad Compose
    shutdowns while either application has active work.
  - Keep production database and normal workers running during a disposable
    restore rehearsal unless the selected engine explicitly requires otherwise.
  - Validate cleanup by measuring the dedicated temporary volume afterward.
  - Preserve the durable failure record even though the active UI later returns
    to READY.
  - Test the restored system, not only archive checksums.

The host storage boundary and a proven Chessism reference now exist. Real Butler
implementation must begin with its own authoritative-state inventory and end
only after a manually triggered, disposable restore test succeeds and cleans up
all temporary data.
